
Settlers of Catan - ICS4U Addition

By: Lukas Krampitz, and Evan Kreutzwiser

Introduction:
Settlers of Catan - ICS4U Addition is a digital version of the popular board game Settlers of Catan. It is written in Java by students of Centennial CVI. Enjoy a lovely game of Settlers of Catan on your computer with your friends.

Table Of Contents:
 1. Installation
 2. Startup 
 3. Main Menu
     a. New Game
     b. Load Game
     c. Credits
     e. User Manual
     f. Exit
 4. Objective Of Game
 5. Initial Setup
 6. Turns
 7. Resources
 8. Building
 9. Termination
     a. Saving
     b. Natural end

1. Installation
There is no installation required as the game is standalone. 

Requirements:
    Have Java 8 or higher installed
    Download the game file from https://github.com/Evan-Kreutzwiser/ICS4U-Settlers-Of-Catan

2. Startup 
The program can be started by double clicking on the “Settlers of Catan - ICS4U.jar" file. The first thing shown upon start up is the main menu.

3. Main Menu

The main menu contains 5 buttons:

a. New Game
Starts a new game on a pre-generated board.
See section 5 (initial setup) for details about starting the new game.

b. Load Game
Not available in the current version of the game.

c. Credits
Displays the credits of those who worked on the game.

d. User Manual
Displays this manual

e. Exit
Close the game

4. Objective Of Game
The goal of this game is to be the first to earn 10 victory points. Victory points are gained by building and upgrading settlements, and the first player to have 10 or more points at the end of their turn wins.

5. Initial Setup
When the game begins, players must place their initial 2 settlements and 2 roads.
Use the build menu on the left to select what to build and then click on one of the green rectangles on the board. The green rectangles mark all of the possible positions.

6. Turns
Every turn, the virtual dice are rolled to determine which tiles will provide materials that turn. If the number rolled matches the number on the tile, and a player has a settlement on a corner of that tile, the player receives one of the resources the tile produces.

During their turn, the player can build as many roads or settlements they want, as long as they have the resource cards needed to build them.

At the end of the turn, the player can click the End Turn button in the top left corner of the screen below to hide their cards, then the players are given the chance to switch seats. When the next player is ready to begin their turn, they may do so by clicking the Start Turn button.

7. Resources
The board has 5 different types of resources, which are used to build roads and settlements to gain victory points.
Resources are obtained by rolling the number displayed on the world tile of which one of your settlements lies.

All players that have access to a tile with the rolled number receive their resources, regardless of it actively being their turn.

Collected resources are shown as cards, which are spent to build roads or settlements.
 
The 5 types of resources are:
 1. Clay
 2. Wood
 3. Wheat
 4. Sheep
 5. Ore

8. Building
Players can spend their resource cards to build roads and settlements or upgrade settlements on their turn. Building works similarly to the initial placement described in section 6 (Initial Setup). Players select what they want to build from the build menu, and click inside one of the green boxes to select where to build.

Unlike during setup, there are restrictions on where the player can build. Settlements can only be built on spaces connected to a road owned by the player building it, and settlements cannot be built where another player already has 2 roads connect to that point

Roads can only be placed where they connect to another one of the player’s roads or settlements, and roads cannot extend through the same space as another players’ settlements.

Players can upgrade their existing settlements to get an extra victory point        
The higher blue settlement cannot be placed there due to the road going through that position

The box in the top right corner of the game window shows what resource cards are required to perform each build action, and how many victory points each type of building is worth

9. Termination
There are two ways to terminate the game. 

a. Saving
The first way is to exit while the game is still active and there is no winner yet.
This can be done by clicking on the “< Save and Exit” button in the bottom left corner of the screen. Doing so brings up a file picker to select where the game is saved.

Not every file format is guaranteed to work. The best option is that of a standard text file with the extension “.txt”.

b. Natural end
The other way for the game to end is naturally. In this termination a winner of the game has been declared after earning 10 victory points, and a summary message is displayed.

After clicking the okay button the game terminates and returns to the main menu, where the exit button can be clicked to terminate the game.

